kadācidgopālān vihitamakhasambhāravibhavān
nirīkṣya tvaṃ śaure maghavamadamuddhvaṃsitumanā: |
vijānannapyetān vinayamṛdu nandādipaśupā-
napṛccha: ko vā'yaṃ janaka bhavatāmudyama iti ||1||
kadācit-	once
gopālān	(when) the cowherds
vihita-makha-	(had) collected for the Yagya
sambhāra-vibhavān	the requisite materials many (of them)
nirīkṣya tvaṃ	seeing this, Thou
śaure	O Shauri!
maghava-madam-	Indra's pride
uddhvaṃsitu-manā:	to humble, desiring
vijānana-api-etān	knowing though these (preparations)
vinaya-mṛdu	politely and softly
nanda-ādi-paśupān-	to Nanda and other cowherds
apṛccha:	asked
ka: vā-ayaṃ	(for) what or this
janaka bhavatām-	O Father! (is) your
udyama iti	effort thus
O Shauri! Once the cowherds were collecting the requisite material to perform a Yagya to appease Indra. Thou wanted to humble the pride of Indra. In spite of knowing what the preparations were for, Thou, in full humility and politeness asked Nanda and the other cowherds, 'O Father what is this your effort for?'
babhāṣe nandastvāṃ suta nanu vidheyo maghavato
makho varṣe varṣe sukhayati sa varṣeṇa pṛthivīm |
nṛṇāṃ varṣāyattaṃ nikhilamupajīvyaṃ mahitale
viśeṣādasmākaṃ tṛṇasalilajīvā hi paśava: ||2||
babhāṣe nanda:-tvām	said Nanda to Thee
suta nanu	O son! Indeed
vidheya: maghavata:	has to be performed for Indra
makha: varṣe varṣe	Yagya every year
sukhayati sa	gives happiness he
varṣeṇa pṛthivīm	by rain to the earth
nṛṇām varṣāyattam	of human beings, on rain depends
nikhilam-upajīvyam	all livelihood
mahitale	on the earth
viśeṣāt-asmākam	particularly for us
tṛṇa-salila-jīvā	(on) grass (and) water live
hi paśava:	indeed the cows
Nanda told Thee, 'O son! A yagya has to be performed for Indra every year. He gives happiness to the earth by rain. The livelihood of all human beings on earth depends on rain. Especially so for us, because our cattle live on grass and water alone.'
iti śrutvā vācaṃ piturayi bhavānāha sarasaṃ
dhigetanno satyaṃ maghavajanitā vṛṣṭiriti yat |
adṛṣṭaṃ jīvānāṃ sṛjati khalu vṛṣṭiṃ samucitāṃ
mahāraṇye vṛkṣā: kimiva balimindrāya dadate ||3||
iti śrutvā	this hearing
vācaṃ pitu:-	words of father
ayi bhavān-āha	O Thou said
sarasaṃ	(with) reasoning
dhik-etat-no satyaṃ	oh this is not true
maghava-janitā	by Indra (is) generated
vṛṣṭi:-iti yat	rain, to say so
adṛṣṭaṃ jīvānāṃ	unseen (past actions) of the living beings
sṛjati khalu	generates indeed
vṛṣṭiṃ samucitāṃ	the rain required
mahā-araṇye	in the big forest
vṛkṣā: kim-iva	the trees what like
balim-indrāya	offerings for Indra
dadate	(do) give?
O Lord! Hearing this, Thou said with sweet reasoning, 'Oh no, this is not true, to say that the rain is generated by Indra. Rain is generated by the unseen past actions of the living beings, as required. In this big forest, what kind of offerings do the trees give to Indra?'
idaṃ tāvat satyaṃ yadiha paśavo na: kuladhanaṃ
tadājīvyāyāsau baliracalabhartre samucita: |
surebhyo'pyutkṛṣṭā nanu dharaṇidevā: kṣititale
tataste'pyārādhyā iti jagaditha tvaṃ nijajanān ||4||
idaṃ tāvat satyaṃ	this then is true
yat-iha paśava:	that here the cows
na: kula-dhanaṃ	(are our) tribe's wealth
tat-ājīvyāya-	so for their livelihood
asau-bali:	this offering
acala-bhartre	to the great mountain
samucita:	is appropriate
surebhya:-api-	than the gods also
utkṛṣṭā nanu	greater are indeed
dharaṇi-devā:	holy men
kṣititale tata:-	on the earth, therefore
te-api-ārādhyā	they also deserve to be worshipped
iti jagaditha tvam	thus said Thou
nija-janān	to Thy people
Thou said to Thy people,'this is true that the cows are the wealth of our tribe. This mountain (Govardhana) provides them with their requisite grass and water. So the offerings should be made to the mountain. The holy men on the earth are indeed more great than the gods, so they also deserve to be worshipped.'
bhavadvācaṃ śrutvā bahumatiyutāste'pi paśupā:
dvijendrānarcanto balimadaduruccai: kṣitibhṛte |
vyadhu: prādakṣiṇyaṃ subhṛśamanamannādarayutā-
stvamādaśśailātmā balimakhilamābhīrapurata: ||5||
bhavat-vācaṃ śrutvā	Thy words hearing
bahu-mati-yutā:-	with high regards
te-api paśupā:	they also, the cowherds
dvijendrān-arcanta:	holy men worshipping
balim-adadu:-	offerings gave
uccai: kṣitibhṛte	richly / plentifully to the mountain
vyadhu: prādakṣiṇyaṃ	performed circumambulation
subhṛśam-anaman-	again and again prostrated
ādarayutā:-	with great reverence
tvam-āda:	Thou ate
śaila-ātmā	(becoming) the mountain's soul
balim-akhilam-	the offerings entire
ābhīra-purata:	in the cowherds' front
Hearing Thy words the cowherds also worshipped the holy men with high regards. They made rich and plentiful offerings to the mountain. They performed circumambulation and prostrated again and again with great reverence. Thou becoming the soul of the mountain ate all the entire offerings in front of the cowherds.
avocaścaivaṃ tān kimiha vitathaṃ me nigaditaṃ
girīndro nanveṣa svabalimupabhuṅkte svavapuṣā |
ayaṃ gotro gotradviṣi ca kupite rakṣitumalaṃ
samastānityuktā jahṛṣurakhilā gokulajuṣa: ||6||
avoca:-ca-evaṃ tān	said and thus to them
kim-iha vitathaṃ me	what there false by me
nigaditaṃ	was said
girīndra: nanu eṣa	the mountain indeed this
sva-balim-upabhuṅkte	his offerings (given to him) is eating
sva-vapuṣā	by his own body
ayaṃ gotra:	this mountain
gotradviṣi ca	(when) the enemy of the mountains (Indra)
kupite	gets angry
rakṣitum-alaṃ	to protect is enough
samastān-	everybody
iti-uktā	thus being said to
jahṛṣu:-akhilā	were happy all of them
gokula-juṣa:	Gokula's inhabitants
Thou told them 'Was I wrong? This mountain has physically consumed all our offerings. Even if the enemy of mountains, Indra is angry, this mountain is capable of protecting everyone.' All the inhabitants of Gokula were happy on hearing this.
pariprītā yātā: khalu bhavadupetā vrajajuṣo
vrajaṃ yāvattāvannijamakhavibhaṅgaṃ niśamayan |
bhavantaṃ jānannapyadhikarajasā''krāntahṛdayo
na sehe devendrastvaduparacitātmonnatirapi ||7||
pariprītā	in jubilation
yātā: khalu	went indeed
bhavat-upetā	you accompanying
vrajajuṣa: vrajaṃ	the inhabitants of Vraja to Vraja
yāvat-tāvat-	when then
nija-makha-vibhaṅgaṃ	(his) own Yagya stoppage
niśamayan	hearing
bhavantaṃ jānan-api-	Thee knowing also
adhika-rajasā-	(because of) preponderance of Rajoguna
ākrānta-hṛdaya:	with an overcome mind
na sehe devendra:-	did not tolerate Indra
tvat-uparacita-	by Thee ordained
ātma-unnati:-api	his own exhaultation also
The inhabitants of Vraja, in a jubilant mood returned to Vraja with Thee. Then, when Indra heard of his yagya being stopped he did not tolerate it because his mind was overcome by the preponderance of Rajo Guna. Indra knew Thee well and was also aware that his own high position was ordained by Thee, yet he was enraged.
manuṣyatvaṃ yāto madhubhidapi deveṣvavinayaṃ
vidhatte cennaṣṭastridaśasadasāṃ ko'pi mahimā |
tataśca dhvaṃsiṣye paśupahatakasya śriyamiti
pravṛttastvāṃ jetuṃ sa kila maghavā durmadanidhi: ||8||
manuṣyatvaṃ yāta:	human form taking
madhubhit-api	the destroyer of the demon Madhu (MahaaVishnu) also
deveṣu-avinayaṃ	towards the gods disrespect
vidhatte cet-	shows if
naṣṭa:-tridaśasadasāṃ	is lost of all the gods
ka:-api mahimā	what ever prestige
tata:-ca dhvaṃsiṣye	and so will destroy
paśupa-hatakasya	(this) lowly cowherd's
śriyam-iti	all prosperity, thus
pravṛtta:-tvāṃ jetuṃ	setting out, Thou to win
sa kila maghavā	he indeed Indra
durmada-nidhi:	false pride full of
Indra was full of false pride and set out to win Thee. He reasoned that even if it was Vishnu himself, the slayer of Madhu, in human form, if he shows disrespect to the gods, what ever their prestige, would be lost. So he made up his mind to destroy the lowly cowherd (Krishna) and all his prosperity, and to win Thee.
tvadāvāsaṃ hantuṃ pralayajaladānambarabhuvi
prahiṇvan bibhrāṇa; kuliśamayamabhrebhagamana: |
pratasthe'nyairantardahanamarudādyaiviṃhasito
bhavanmāyā naiva tribhuvanapate mohayati kam ||9||
tvat-āvāsaṃ hantuṃ	Thy residence (Vraja) to destroy
pralaya-jaladān-	deluge causing clouds
ambara-bhuvi	in the skies' surface
prahiṇvan	releasing
bibhrāṇa: kuliśam-	taking thunderbolt
ayam-abhrebha-gamana:	this (Indra) Airaavat riding
pratasthe-anyai:-anta:-	set out with others, inside (in their minds)
dahana-maruta-ādyai:-	(like) fire (Agni), wind (Vaayu) etc.,
vihaṃsita:	being scorned
bhavat-māyā	Thy Maayaa
na-eva	does not indeed
tribhuvanapate	O Lord of three worlds
mohayati kam	delude whom
To destroy Thy residence Vraja, Indra released deluge causing clouds in the skies. He took along thunderbolt and set out riding on his white elephant Airaavata. He was accompanied by other gods, fire(Agni), wind(Vaayu),etc., who slyly scorned him. O Lord of three worlds! whom does not Thy Maayaa afflict?
surendra: kruddhaścet dvijakaruṇayā śailakṛpayā'-
pyanātaṅko'smākaṃ niyata iti viśvāsya paśupān |
aho kinnāyāto giribhiditi sañcintya nivasan
marudgehādhīśa praṇuda muravairin mama gadān ||10||
surendra: kruddha:-cet	Indra gets angry, in case
dvija-karuṇayā	by the holy men's grace
śaila-kṛpayā-api-	by the mountain's grace also
anātaṅka:-	fearlessness
asmākam	is ours
niyata iti	certainly thus
viśvāsya paśupān	convincing the cowherds
aho	O Alas!
kim-na-āyāta:	what, he has not come (yet)
giribhid-iti	Indra thus
sañcintya nivasan	thinking ,waiting
marudgehādhīśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
praṇuda muravairin	eradicate, O Slayer of Mura
mama gadān	my ailments
Even if Indra is angry, we are fearless by the grace of the holy men and by the grace of the mountain,' saying so Thou certainly convinced the cowherds. Then Thou stood waiting and wondering why Indra had not yet come. O Lord of Guruvaayur! O Slayer of Mura! do eradicate my ailments.